=== PAGE 1 ===
1  
 Faculty of Computing Information Systems and Maths 
(CISM)  
A guide to the Harvard Syste m of Referencing: 
September 2010  
 
This is a brief guide to the Harvard system of citing and referencing, which is based on Cite them right: 
the essential referencing guid e, by Richard Pears and Graham Shields (2008). You can borrow Cite them right 
from the Study Skills Collection in Penrhyn Road LRC  
1. Why do I need  to use citations  and references  in my work ?                         
Citation : By including a citation in yo ur essay or assignment, you are acknowledging the contribution of a 
specific individual or organisation as a source of a particular statement, view, argument or decision. In your 
essay or assignment, you „cite‟ the author(s) and year of publication of any source you use, whether you 
are quoting directly or paraphrasing (using your own words) . This is known as in -text citation.  
Referencing :  Referencing ensures that whatever you have cited can be identified precisely. At the end of 
your essay or assignment,  you list all your references in alphabetical order by the first author or editor‟s 
surname, under the heading „References‟. This enables your reader to trace your sources and also gives 
credit to the original author(s).  
By citing and referencing your wor k correctly, you avoid the charge of plagiarism , which means using the 
work of others without acknowledging your source of information or inspiration. Plagiarism is treated very 
seriously and, normally, plagiarised work is disqualified.  
For more informati on about referencing and how to avoid plagiarism, see Pears and Shields, 2008, pp.11 -
13.  
2. Confidentiality   
It is your responsibility to ensure that client confidentiality is maintained in your written work. This 
includes in -text citations and references . If you use unpublished material from a particular company , which 
is deemed to be confidential,  you can say, for example: Type of Company  (name withheld) (2005) 
Disciplinary policy.  
3. Common  knowledge   
You do not need to reference common knowledge, which  is described as “facts, dates, events and 
information that are expected to be known by someone studying or working in a particular field” (Pears 
and Shields, 2008, p.12). For more information about what is considered to be common knowledge, refer 
to Pears  and Shields, pp. 12 -13.  

=== PAGE 2 ===
2  
 4. How to cite  
 You should include page number(s) if you are using a direct quotation:  
 
According to Stajano (2002, p.69 ) integrity in the field of computer security  is “the property that 
data holds when it has not been modified  in unauthorized ways ”. 
 
Also use page numbers if you are referring to a particular section of the text, for example, a table or a 
mathematical formula : 
 
Figure 5 -10 in Security in Computing  (2006, p. 267) gives an overview of an operating system‟s 
functio ns. 
 
Otherwise, you need only include the author(s) and date of publication.  
See the in -text citations in this guide and Pears and Shields (2008, pp.14 -18) for more information about 
citing.  
5. How to reference   
References are listed at the end of your as signment, with all types of resources listed together. List them in 
alphabetical order, by the first author(s) surname (family name) or the name of the organisation if the 
author is an organisation. Do not number or bullet -point your references.  
If more t han one work has been published by an author, list them by date, with the earliest first. If more 
than one work has been published by the same author during one year, then list them by letter: (2005a) 
(2005b) etc.  
If you cannot identify an author, do not use “Anonymous” but use the title of the work. If you cannot 
identify a date, use: (no date).  
For more information, see Pears and Shields (2008) pp. 19 —22.  
Full references are made up in different ways, depending on the type of material you have used. Th e 
examples in this guide show what to include in the references for the most commonly used types of 
material, including when to use italics and abbreviations. Note that for all printed material (except paper 
journals) you include the place of publication ( the town) before the publisher name.  
See Pears and Shields (2008, pp. 23 -72) for more examples of different types of material.  
  
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
3  
 6.  Referencing  different  types  of material  
a. Books  
Book by a single author:  
In-text citation:  
According to Stajano (2002 ) ubiquitous computing is not yet a reality…. ...  
Reference list:  
Stajano,F. (2002 ) Security for ubiquitous computing . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons .  
Book by two or three authors:  
In-text citation:  
Explaining the security implications of threats in netw orks, Pfleeger and Pfleeger (2006 ) state 
that….  
Reference list:  
Pfleeger, C . P. and Pfleeger, S . L.(2006 ) Security in computing . 4th edn. Upper Saddle River,NJ : 
Prentice Hall .  
Book by four or more authors:  
Note: When you are referring to a work by fou r or more authors, cite the first author listed in the work 
followed by et al. All authors names are given in the reference list  at the end, no matter how many there 
are, so that each author or editor receives credit for their research and published work.  
In-text citation:  
This was proved by Young et al. (2005) …..  
Reference list:  
Young, H. D., Freedman, R. A., Sandin, T. and Ford, A. (2000) Sears and Zemansky’s university physics. 
10th edn. San Francisco: Addison -Wesley.  
Chapter in an edited book:  
Note: In an edited book the different chapters are written by different authors. The editor is responsible 
for bringing the chapters together into the book. When you use a chapter from an edited book, you 
should reference the specific chapter.  
In-text citat ion:  
According to Hodge and Franks in “addition to the error relating role of feedback ” (2004, p.18)    
  
 

=== PAGE 4 ===
4  
  
Reference list:  
Hodge, N. J.  and  Franks, I. M. (2004) „The nature of feedback‟, in Franks, I. M. and Hughes, M. (ed.) 
Notational Analysis of Sport: Systems for Better Coaching and Performance in Sport. London: 
Routledge, pp.17 -37. 
b. Electronic books (E -books)  
To reference an e -book, you omit the place of publication and the publisher and instead include the name 
of the E-book collection [Online] . Then include the Internet address or URL (Uniform Resource Locator), 
but only the first part is needed, together with the date you accessed the e -book:  
In-text citation:  
Peikari and Chuvakin (2004 ) describe buffer overflows as …..  
Reference list:  
Peikar i,C. and Chuvakin, A. (2004 ) Security warrior .  Safari Books Online  [Online]. Available at: 
http://www. safaribooksonline .com (Accessed: 7 September  2009).  
c. Journals  
To reference articles in journals, you include the title of the article in inverted com mas and the title of the 
journal in italics. Then include details of the volume and issue and the page range of the article within the 
journal.  
 
Article in a printed journal:  
In-text citation:  
The purpose of the article  (Yap, 2009 ) was to investigate …   
Reference list:  
Yap, V. B.. (2009 ) „Similar states in continuous -time Markov chains ‟, Journal of Applied Probability , 
46(2), pp.497-506.  
 
 
Article in an electronic journal which is part of an e -journal collection:  
The majority of journal articles avai lable through the library web pages are part of e -journal collections, 
such as ScienceDirect or Ebsco . You need to include the name of the journal collection, the first part of the 
URL and the date accessed.   
  
 

=== PAGE 5 ===
5  
 In-text citation:  
Duta (2009) discussed the u se of biometric recognition …..…  
Reference list:  
Duta, N. (2009) „A Survey of biometric technology based on hand shape‟, Pattern Recognition ,42(11), 
pp.2797 -2806. ACM Digital Library [Online]. Available at: 
http://portal.acm.org.ezproxy.kingston.ac.uk/ ( Accessed: 7 September 2009).  
 
For any other online journals, include the Internet address (URL) in full. For more information, see Pears 
and Shields (2008), p. 32 -33.  
d. Websites  
To reference websites, you need to include the Internet address (URL) in full:  
In-text citation:  
Actuaries must comply with professional requirements in the byelaws of the Faculty or Institute 
(Institute of Actuaries , 2009).  
Reference list:  
Institute of Actuaries  (2009) Professional conduct and discipline . Available at: 
http://www.actuaries.org.uk/regulation/conduct_discipline (Accessed: 7 September 2009).  
For more examples of how to reference different materials, see Pears and Shields (2008).  
7. Secondary  referencing   
If you wish to quote a piece of work that has been refe rred to in something that you have read, it is called 
„secondary referencing‟ as you have not read the original work.  
Your text must make it clear that you have not read the original but are referring to it from another 
source. The examples below show dif ferent ways you can do this.  
 
In-text citation:  
In 1996, Padesky distinguished between the mode and the focus of clinical supervision (Todd, 2005, 
p.42).  
 
Todd (2005, p.42) explains how Padesky (1996) distinguished between the mode and the focus of 
clinical supervision.   
  

=== PAGE 6 ===
6  
  
It may be useful to distinguish between the mode and the focus of clinical supervision (Padesky, 
1996, cited in Todd, 2005, p. 42).  
 
In the examples above, the writer used an idea of Padesky from 1996. But they found this on page 42 of a 
book by Todd (2005), and so it is Todd (2005, p.42) that they are citing. And they would include only the 
Todd (2005) source in their reference list. They would not list the work written by Padesky in their 
reference list as they have not read that wo rk.  
8. Further  support  with referencing   
Pears and Shields (2008) provides a complete guide and further examples of citations and references.  
If you have questions about any aspect of referencing, you can ask at the helpdesks within the LRC.  
Reference:   
Pears, R. and Shields, G. (2008) Cite them right: the essential referencing guide . Newcastle upon Tyne: Pear 
Tree Books.  
 
Kingston University, Information Services  
September 2010    